Add blog article: Howto migrate a real-life batch pipeline from the DataSet API to the DataStream API (#631)
apache/flink-web: docs/content/posts/2023-04-12-howto-migrate-to-datastream.md

The use case shown here is extracted from a broader work comparing Flink performances of different
APIs
by implementing [TPCDS](https://www.tpc.org/tpcds/) queries using these APIs.

## What is TPCDS?

TPC-DS is a decision support benchmark that models several generally applicable aspects of a
decision support system. The purpose of TPCDS benchmarks is to provide relevant, objective
performance data of Big Data engines to industry users.

## Chosen TPCDS query

The chosen query for this article is **Query3**  because it contains all the more common analytics
operators (filter, join, aggregation, group by, order by, limit). It represents an analytic query on
store sales. Its SQL code is presented here:

`SELECT dt.d_year, item.i_brand_id brand_id, item.i_brand brand,SUM(ss_ext_sales_price) sum_agg
FROM  date_dim dt, store_sales, item
WHERE dt.d_date_sk = store_sales.ss_sold_date_sk
AND store_sales.ss_item_sk = item.i_item_sk
AND item.i_manufact_id = 128
AND dt.d_moy=11
GROUP BY dt.d_year, item.i_brand, item.i_brand_id
ORDER BY dt.d_year, sum_agg desc, brand_id
LIMIT 100`

## The initial DataSet pipeline

The pipeline we are migrating

> is [this one](https://github.com/echauchot/tpcds-benchmark-flink/blob/f342c1983ec340e52608eb1835e85c82c8ece1d2/src/main/java/org/example/tpcds/flink/Query3ViaFlinkRowDataset.java)
> , it is a batch pipeline that implements the above query using the DataSet API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is [this](https://github.com/echauchot/tpcds-benchmark-flink/blob/f342c1983ec340e52608eb1835e85c82c8ece1d2/src/main/java/org/example/tpcds/flink/Query3ViaFlinkRowDataset.java)
batch pipeline that implements the above query using the DataSet API
```

and [Row](https://javadoc.io/static/org.apache.flink/flink-core/1.16.0/org/apache/flink/types/Row.html)
as dataset element type.

## Migrating the DataSet pipeline to a DataStream pipeline

> There is no point in going through all of the code which is
> available [here](https://github.com/echauchot/tpcds-benchmark-flink/blob/master/src/main/java/org/example/tpcds/flink/Query3ViaFlinkRowDatastream.java)
> . We will rather focus on some key areas of the migration. The code is based on the latest release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of going through all of the code which is
available [here](https://github.com/echauchot/tpcds-benchmark-flink/blob/master/src/main/java/org/example/tpcds/flink/Query3ViaFlinkRowDatastream.java)
 we will rather focus on some key areas of the migration. The code is based on the latest release
```

see [FLINK-22587](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22587) for details). Basically, the
problem is with the trigger of the
default [GlobalWindow](https://javadoc.io/static/org.apache.flink/flink-streaming-java/1.16.0/org/apache/flink/streaming/api/windowing/windows/GlobalWindow.html)
which never fires so the records are never output. We will workaround this problem by applying a
custom [EndOfStream](https://github.com/echauchot/tpcds-benchmark-flink/blob/master/src/main/java/org/example/tpcds/flink/Query3ViaFlinkRowDatastream.java#L254-L295)
window. It is a window assigner that assigns all the records to a
single [TimeWindow](https://javadoc.io/static/org.apache.flink/flink-streaming-java/1.16.0/org/apache/flink/streaming/api/windowing/windows/TimeWindow.html)
. So, like for the GlobalWindow, all the records are assigned to the same window except that this
window's trigger is based on the end of the window (which is set to _Long.MAX_VALUE_). As we are on
a bounded source, at some point the watermark will advance to +INFINITY (Long.MAX_VALUE) and will
thus cross the end of the time window and consequently fire the trigger and output the records.

> Now that we have a working triggering, we just need to call a standard join with the  _Row::join_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have a working triggering, we need to call a standard join with the  _Row::join_
```

function.

### [Migrating the group by and reduce (sum) operations](https://github.com/echauchot/tpcds-benchmark-flink/blob/master/src/main/java/org/example/tpcds/flink/Query3ViaFlinkRowDatastream.java#L147-L170)

DataStream API has no
more [groupBy()](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.12/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/java/DataSet.html#groupBy-org.apache.flink.api.java.functions.KeySelector-)
method, we now use
the [keyBy()](https://javadoc.io/static/org.apache.flink/flink-streaming-java/1.16.0/org/apache/flink/streaming/api/datastream/DataStream.html#keyBy-org.apache.flink.api.java.functions.KeySelector-)
method. An aggregation downstream will be applied on elements with the same key exactly as
a [GroupReduceFunction](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.12/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/common/functions/GroupReduceFunction.html)

> would have done on a DataSet unless it will not materialize the collection of data. The summing

Reviewer: > unless it will not materialize the collection of data

Not sure what this is referring to.

Author: Wording issue. I meant "except  it will not materialize the collection of data".
Correct me if I'm wrong but DataSet#groupBy() shuffles the data per key and materializes the data belonging to the same key in memory (in a collection) whereas DataStream#keyBy() doesn't do this materialization.

Reviewer: > DataSet#groupBy() [...] materializes the data belonging to the same key in memory

That depends on what you're doing afterwards.
A reduce doesn't materialize everything and works similarly to a streaming reduce.

For a join, one/both sides are materialized in memory and/or spilled to disk.
Group Reduce materializes all data.

Author: Makes sense. So in my case, as the following operator is a reduce, there will be indeed no materialization. Thanks for the details.

Author: the details were added to the article, did you see it ?

.

But, as said above, the DataStream semantics are the ones of a streaming pipeline. The arriving data
is thus considered infinite. As such we need to "divide" the data to have output times. For that we
need to set a timer to output the resulting data. As we are in batch mode we work in processing
time (and not in event time)
and [set a timer to fire at Long.MAX_VALUE timestamp](https://github.com/echauchot/tpcds-benchmark-flink/blob/9c65e535bbd7f9c7f507e499c31c9280be2993ca/src/main/java/org/example/tpcds/flink/Query3ViaFlinkRowDatastream.java#L179)
meaning that the timer will fire at the end of the batch.

To sort the data, we store the incoming rows inside
a [ListState](https://javadoc.io/static/org.apache.flink/flink-core/1.16.0/org/apache/flink/api/common/state/ListState.html)
and sort them at output time, when the timer fires in
the [onTimer()](https://javadoc.io/static/org.apache.flink/flink-streaming-java/1.16.0/org/apache/flink/streaming/api/functions/KeyedProcessFunction.html#onTimer-long-org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.KeyedProcessFunction.OnTimerContext-org.apache.flink.util.Collector-)
callback.

> Another thing: to be able to use Flink state, we need to key the datastream beforeward even if there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another thing: to be able to use Flink state, we need to key the datastream beforehand, even if there
```

is no group by key because Flink state is designed per-key. Thus, we key by a fake static key so
that there is a single state.

### [Migrating the limit operation](https://github.com/echauchot/tpcds-benchmark-flink/blob/master/src/main/java/org/example/tpcds/flink/Query3ViaFlinkRowDatastream.java#L201-L204)

Like for the order by migration, here also we need to adapt to the streaming semantics in which we
don't have the whole data at hand. Once again, we use the state API. We apply a mapper that stores
the incoming rows into

> a [ValueState](https://javadoc.io/static/org.apache.flink/flink-core/1.16.0/org/apache/flink/api/common/state/ValueState.html)

Reviewer: Why aren't you linking to the Flink javadocs at https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.16/api/java/?

Author: because at the time I wrote this article I did not know that javadocs were also in nightlies and I forgot to change the links in this old article. Thanks for catching it, I'll update all the links in this article.

Author: done

to count them and stop at the set limit. Here also we need to key by a static key to be able to use
the state API.
The code resides in

> the [LimitMapper](https://github.com/echauchot/tpcds-benchmark-flink/blob/master/src/main/java/org/example/tpcds/flink/Query3ViaFlinkRowDatastream.java#L232-L253)

Reviewer: This seems weird. It's super sketchy for a function to just close() itself.

Why not map records to "1" and apply a reduce function that maxes out at 100?

Author: I agree it is sketchy. I did that to be sure to keep the order built in the previous step. That being said, I could replace by a `ProcessFunction` that does the limit. Indeed, I tested : there is no rebalancing of data (just a hash) between the order by step and the limit step in Flink execution graph.  

Also please note that I could have done much simpler code by mixing DataStream code with SQL/Table API especially using `LIMIT 100` and `ORDER BY` but the point was to try to code the equivalent of DataSet features with pure DataStream API to prepare the migration path for users (discover limitations such as [this one](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22587)) and also to compare the performance of both APIs.

Author: Limit code was remade and article updated. Did you see it ?

. But the resulting code is very similar to the one using the DataSet API. It's only
that [Encoder#encode()](https://javadoc.io/static/org.apache.flink/flink-core/1.16.0/org/apache/flink/api/common/serialization/Encoder.html#encode-IN-java.io.OutputStream-)
method writes bytes
when [TextOutputFormat.TextFormatter#format()](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.12/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/java/io/TextOutputFormat.TextFormatter.html#format-IN-)
wrote Strings.

## Conclusion

As you saw for the migration of the join operation, the new unified DataStream API has some
limitations left in batch mode. In addition, the order by and limit resulting code is quite manual
and requires the help of the Flink state API for the migration. For all these reasons, the Flink
community recommends to use Flink SQL for batch pipelines. It results in much simpler code, good
performance and out-of-the-box analytics capabilities. You could find the equivalent Query3 code
that uses
the [Flink SQL/Table API](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/overview/)
in

> the [Query3ViaFlinkSQLCSV class](https://github.com/echauchot/tpcds-benchmark-flink/blob/master/src/main/java/org/example/tpcds/flink/Query3ViaFlinkSQLCSV.java)

Reviewer: Let's point to a specific commit instead of the master branch

Author: yes, I did that for all the other links in the other articles, thanks for catching this missing one !

Author: done

title:  "Howto migrate a real-life batch pipeline from the DataSet API to the DataStream API"
date: "2023-04-12T08:00:00.000Z"
authors:

- echauchot:
  name: "Etienne Chauchot"
  twitter: "echauchot"
  aliases:

> - /2023/04/12/2023-04-12-howto-migrate-to-datastream.html

Reviewer: we shouldnt need an alias; this is only required for older blog posts.

Author: fixed
